School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science
Queen Mary University of London

ECS7020P Principles of Machine Learning
Methodology I
Dr Jesús Requena Carrión

12 Feb 2026

Ventris’ decisive check

”... and a decisive check, preferably with
the aid of virgin material, to ensure that
the apparent results are not due to fantasy,
coincidence or circular reasoning”

2/48

Don’t fool yourself!

3/48

What’s different about machine learning?

Machine learning aims at building solutions that work well on samples
coming from a target population.
Many other areas have similar goals, so what’s different?
In machine learning, we lack a description of the target population.
All we can do is extract samples from the population (known as
sampling the population).
A collection of samples extracted from a population forms a dataset. A
dataset provides an empirical description of our target population. In
other words, they are population surrogates.

4/48

Sampling a population
We need to ensure that datasets are representative and provide a
complete picture of the target population by:
Extracting samples randomly and independently.
Ensuring they come from the target population (identically
distributed).
Having a sufficiently large number of samples.
Independent and identically distributed datasets are known as IID.

Population

Sampling
Dataset

5/48

Agenda

Testing a model to evaluate its deployment quality
Optimisation and the error surface
Training a model
Validating our models
Summary and other validation approaches

6/48

Deployment quality
Machine learning models can be built, sold and deployed.

Piors
Learner
Data
Model

New data

Deployment

Prediction/Action

Take 2 definition: The best model is the one with the highest
deployment quality, i.e. the best on the target population.

7/48

Deployment quality

Every machine learning project needs to include a strategy to evaluate
the quality of a model during deployment.
In machine learning, a quality evaluation strategy includes:
1. A quality metric used to quantify the quality.
2. How data will be used to assess the quality of a model.
The quality evaluation strategy has to be designed before creating a
model to avoid falling into our own data-traps, such as confirmation bias.
By changing it retrospectively you are moving the goalposts.

8/48

Assessing the deployment quality
If we could use all the data that models can be shown (population), we
would be able to quantify their true deployment quality.
Instead we use a subset of data, the test dataset, to compute the test
quality as an estimation of the true deployment quality.

Population

Sampling

Test
dataset

Test quality

True quality

9/48

Random nature of the test quality
Test datasets are extracted randomly. Hence, the test quality is itself
random, as different datasets will in general produce different values.

Test
dataset 1

Test
dataset 2

Population

True quality

Test quality 1

Test
dataset 3

Test quality 2

Test quality 3

10/48

Comparing models
Models built by different teams can be compared based on their test
qualities.
Caution should be used, as the test quality is a random quantity, hence
some models might appear to be superior by chance!

Test quality model 1

Population

Test
dataset

Test quality model 2

Test quality model 3

11/48

The Infinite Monkey Theorem

12/48

Agenda

Testing a model to evaluate its deployment quality
Optimisation and the error surface
Training a model
Validating our models
Summary and other validation approaches

13/48

Optimisation theory

Assume that we have:
A collection of candidate models, e.g. all the models resulting from
tuning the linear model f (x) = w0 + w1 x.
A quality metric, e.g. a notion of error.
A perfect description of the target population.
Optimisation allows us to identify among all the candidate models the
one that achieves the highest quality on the target population, i.e. the
optimal model.

14/48

The error surface
The error surface (a.k.a. error, objective, loss or cost function) denoted
by E(w) maps each candidate model w to its error. We will assume
that we can obtain it using the ideal description of our target population.

15/48

The error surface

Error

Error surfaces can also be represented as colour-coded and contour maps,
where a colour scheme encodes the error values.

16/48

The error surface and the optimal model
The optimal model can be identified as the one with the lowest error.

17/48

The error surface and the optimal model
The gradient (slope) of the error surface, ∇E(w), is zero at the optimal
model. Hence we can look for it by identifying where ∇E(w) = 0.

18/48

The error surface and the optimal model
What if do not have enough computation power to obtain the error or the
gradient of every candidate model, how can we find the optimal model?

Ask yourself: can you climb up/down a mountain in total darkness?

19/48

Gradient descent

Gradient descent is a numerical optimisation method where we update
iteratively our model using the gradient of the error surface.
The gradient provides the direction along which the error increases the
most. Using the gradient, we can create the following update rule:
wnew = wold − ∇E(wold )
where  is known as the learning rate or step size.
With every iteration we adjust the parameters w of our model. This is
why this process is also known as parameter tuning.

20/48

Error

Gradient descent

21/48

The step size

The step size  controls how much we change the parameters w of our
model in each iteration of gradient descent:
Small values of  result in slow convergence to the optimal model.
Large values of  risk overshooting the optimal model.

22/48

Error

Small steps

23/48

Error

Large steps

24/48

Starting and stopping

For gradient descent to start, we need an initial model. The choice of the
initial model can be crucial. The initial parameters w are usually chosen
randomly (but within a sensible range of values).
In general, gradient descent will not reach the optimal model, hence it is
necessary to design a stopping strategy. Common choices include:
Number of iterations.
Processing time.
Error value.
Relative change of the error value.

25/48

Local and global solutions
So far we have considered convex error surfaces. Error surfaces can
however be complex and have
Local optima (model with the lowest error within a region).
Global optima (model with the lowest error among all the models).

26/48

Local and global optimal solutions
Gradient descent can get stuck in local optima. To avoid them, we can
repeat the procedure from several initial models and select the best.

27/48

Agenda

Testing a model to evaluate its deployment quality
Optimisation and the error surface
Training a model
Validating our models
Summary and other validation approaches

28/48

Where is my error surface?

In machine learning we have:
A family of candidate models (e.g. linear models).
A quality metric (e.g. the error).
Data extracted from the population (i.e. not a perfect description).
If we had an ideal description of the target population we could calculate
the error surface and its gradient to find the optimal model.
In machine learning, our starting point is that we do not have a perfect
description of the population and we only have datasets extracted from it.

29/48

The training dataset
We use a subset of samples, known as the training dataset, to
reconstruct the true error surface needed during optimisation. We will
call this new surface the empirical error surface.

Population

Sampling

Training
dataset

30/48

The empirical error surface
The empirical and true error surfaces are in general different. Hence, their
optimal models might differ, i.e. the best model for the training dataset
might not be the best for the population.

31/48

Error

The empirical error surface

32/48

Least squares: minimising the error on a training dataset
Least squares defines an empirical error surface whose gradient can
be obtained exactly. A linear model applied to a training dataset can be
expressed as
ŷ = Xw
where X is the design matrix, ŷ is the predicted label vector and w is the
coefficients vector. The MSE on the training dataset can be written as
EM SE (w)

1
T
(y − ŷ) (y − ŷ)
N
1
T
(y − Xw) (y − Xw)
N

=
=

where y is the true label. The resulting gradient of the MSE is
∇EM SE (w) =
−1

and it is zero for wopt = (XT X)

−2 T
X (y − Xw)
N

XT y.

33/48

Exhaustive approaches
In general, we will not have analytical solutions. We can reconstruct the
empirical error surface by evaluating each model on training data. This is
called brute-force or exhaustive search. Simple, but often impractical.

34/48

Data-driven gradient descent
Gradient descent can be implemented by estimating the gradient of the
empirical error surface. During each iteration, a subset (batch) of the
training dataset is used to compute this gradient.
Batch
1

Population

Training
dataset

Gradient 1

Batch
2

Batch
3

Gradient 2

Gradient 3

The batch size determines how close the estimated gradient is to the true
gradient of the empirical error surface.

35/48

Cost, quality and fooling ourselves

Our goal is always to produce a model that achieves the highest quality
during deployment.
We usually call our notion of quality during training cost or objective
function, to distinguish it from the target quality metric. They can be
different.
Never use the same data for testing and training a model. The test
dataset needs to remain inaccessible to avoid using it (inadvertently or
not) during training.

36/48

Agenda

Testing a model to evaluate its deployment quality
Optimisation and the error surface
Training a model
Validating our models
Summary and other validation approaches

37/48

Why do we need validation?

Machine learning uses datasets for different purposes, for instance to
assess the deployment quality of a final model (test dataset) or to tune
a model (training dataset).
Often, we need to explore different options before training a final model.
For example, consider polynomial regression. The polynomial degree D is
a hyperparameter, as for each value of D a different family of models is
obtained. How can we select the right value of a D?

38/48

Why do we need validation?
Validation methods allow us to use data for assessing and selecting
different families of models. The same data used for validation can then
be used to train a final model.

Population

Dataset

Validation involves one or more training and quality estimation rounds
per model family followed by quality averaging.

39/48

Validation set approach
The validation set approach is the simplest method. It randomly splits the
available dataset into a training and a validation (or hold-out) dataset.
Dataset
Train

Validation

Models are then fitted with the training part and the validation part is
used to estimate its quality.
Other popular validation approaches include Leave-One-Out and
K-Fold cross-validation.

40/48

Agenda

Testing a model to evaluate its deployment quality
Optimisation and the error surface
Training a model
Validating our models
Summary and other validation approaches

41/48

Machine learning methodology: Basic tasks

In machine learning we can identify the following tasks:
Test: This is the most important task. It allows us to estimate the
deployment quality of a model.
Training: Used to find the best values for the parameters of a
model, i.e. to tune a model.
Validation: Necessary to compare different modelling options and
select the best one, the one that will be trained.

42/48

The role of data

In machine learning we do not have an ideal description of the target
population, all we can do is extract data.
Test, training and validation tasks all involve data.
Hence we talk about test dataset, as the data used for testing a
model, training dataset, as the data used for training a model, etc.
Think about the tasks first, then create the datasets that you need.
So you’ve read about splitting a dataset? Splitting datasets is not an
ML task. What we need is to create the right dataset for each task.
This might involve splitting an existing dataset, but not necessarily.

43/48

Using data correctly

Datasets need to be representative of the target population and its
samples need to have been extracted independently.
Any test strategy has to be designed before training. Avoid looking
at the test dataset during training and test a final model only once.
Any quality estimation that is obtained from a dataset is a random
quantity: use with caution.
The quality of a final model depends on the type of model, the
optimisation strategy and the representativity of the training data.

44/48

Leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV)
This method also splits the available dataset into training and validation
sets. However, the validation set contains only one sample.

...

Multiple splits are considered and the final quality is calculated as the
average of the individual qualities (for N samples, we produce N splits
and obtain N different qualities).

45/48

k-fold cross-validation
In this approach the available dataset is divided into k groups (also
known as folds) of approximately equal size:
We carry k rounds of training followed by validation, each one
using a different fold for validation and the remaining for training.
The final estimation of the quality is the average of the qualities
from each round.

LOOCV is a special case of k-fold cross-validation, where k = N .

46/48

Validation approaches: Comparison

The validation set approach involves one training round. Models
are however trained with fewer samples and the final quality is highly
variable due to random splitting.
LOOCV requires as many training rounds as samples there are in
the dataset, however in every round almost all the samples are used
for training. It always provides the same quality estimation.
k-fold is the most popular approach. It involves fewer training
rounds than LOOVC. Compared to the validation set approach, the
quality estimation is less variable and more samples are used for
training.

47/48

Disappointed you didn’t decipher Linear B?

Don’t worry, we still have a
few undeciphered scripts:
Proto-Elamite
Indus
Meroitic
Linear A
Rongorongo
Zapotec
Voiynichese
The Voynich Manuscript, 15th century

48/48

